README.md, before:

# componentize-dotnet-demo

Exploring componentize-dotnet via various examples from [James Sturtevant](https://github.com/jsturtevant) and [Eric Gregory](https://github.com/ericgregory).

## Background Reading

- 📄 [Simplifying components for .NET/C# developers with componentize-dotnet](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/simplifying-components-for-dotnet-developers-with-componentize-dotnet)
- 📄 [Distributing WebAssembly components using OCI registries](https://opensource.microsoft.com/blog/2024/09/25/distributing-webassembly-components-using-oci-registries/)
- 🗂️ [componentize-dotnet](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/componentize-dotnet)
- 🗂️ [csharp-components-demos](https://github.com/jsturtevant/csharp-components-demos)
- 📺 [Exploring C# Wasm Components - James Sturtevant, Microsoft](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cwWb-bE3c4o)
- 📺 [Contain Yourself: Wasm and the OCI Spec - Taylor Thomas, Cosmonic & James Sturtevant, Microsoft](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y8ZDBOR_2Ms)

## Pre-requisites

- [Install .NET 9.0](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/download/dotnet/9.0)
- Wasmtime - `winget install BytecodeAlliance.Wasmtime`
- Install [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) - `winget install Rustlang.Rustup `
- Install [cargo binstall](https://github.com/cargo-bins/cargo-binstall) - `Set-ExecutionPolicy Unrestricted -Scope Process; iex (iwr "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cargo-bins/cargo-binstall/main/install-from-binstall-release.ps1").Content`
- Install [WebAssembly Compositions (WAC)](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wac) CLI - `cargo binstall wac-cli`
- Install [wasm-tools](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasm-tools) - `cargo binstall wasm-tools`

## Hello World demo

Shows how to compile a simple hello world application to WASM

```bash
PS:> cd hello-world
PS:> dotnet restore
Restore complete (29.5s)

Build succeeded in 29.6s
PS:> dotnet build
Restore complete (0.4s)
  hello succeeded (76.9s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 79.7s

PS:> wasmtime bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\native\hello.wasm
Hello, World!
```

## wasi-http-server demo

Shows how reference a WebAssembly Interface Type (WIT) artifact in an OCI registry. See `wasi-http-server.csproj` for the details.

```bash
PS:> cd wasi-http-server
PS:> dotnet build
Restore complete (0.4s)
  hello succeeded (76.9s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 79.7s

PS:> wasmtime serve -S cli  .\bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\native\wasi-http-server.wasm --addr 127.0.0.1:3000 
```

In another terminal

```bash
PS:> Invoke-RestMethod http://127.0.0.1:3000/   
Hello, World!
```

## console-http-request demo

Shows how to make an HTTP request while running in a WASI environment.

```bash
PS:> cd console-http-request
PS:> dotnet build
Restore complete (0.4s)
  console succeeded (3.5s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 6.3s
```

To see the WIT Components in the WASM file, run:

```bash
wasm-tools component wit .\dist\console.wasm

```

<details><summary><b>Show WebAssembly Interface Types (WIT) from the console WASM component.</b></summary>

```wit
package root:component;

world root {
  import wasi:cli/environment@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/exit@0.2.0;
  import wasi:io/error@0.2.0;
  import wasi:io/poll@0.2.0;
  import wasi:io/streams@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/stdin@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/stdout@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/stderr@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/terminal-input@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/terminal-output@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/terminal-stdin@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/terminal-stdout@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/terminal-stderr@0.2.0;
  import wasi:clocks/monotonic-clock@0.2.0;
  import wasi:clocks/wall-clock@0.2.0;
  import wasi:filesystem/types@0.2.0;
  import wasi:filesystem/preopens@0.2.0;
  import wasi:sockets/network@0.2.0;
  import wasi:sockets/udp@0.2.0;
  import wasi:sockets/tcp@0.2.0;
  import wasi:random/random@0.2.0;
  import wasi:http/types@0.2.0;
  import wasi:http/outgoing-handler@0.2.0;

  export wasi:cli/run@0.2.0;
}
package wasi:io@0.2.0 {
  interface error {
    resource error;
  }
  interface poll {
    resource pollable;

    poll: func(in: list<borrow<pollable>>) -> list<u32>;
  }
  interface streams {
    use error.{error};
    use poll.{pollable};

    resource input-stream {
      read: func(len: u64) -> result<list<u8>, stream-error>;
      blocking-read: func(len: u64) -> result<list<u8>, stream-error>;
      subscribe: func() -> pollable;
    }

    variant stream-error {
      last-operation-failed(error),
      closed,
    }

    resource output-stream {
      check-write: func() -> result<u64, stream-error>;
      write: func(contents: list<u8>) -> result<_, stream-error>;
      blocking-write-and-flush: func(contents: list<u8>) -> result<_, stream-error>;
      flush: func() -> result<_, stream-error>;
      blocking-flush: func() -> result<_, stream-error>;
      subscribe: func() -> pollable;
    }
  }
}


package wasi:cli@0.2.0 {
  interface environment {
    get-environment: func() -> list<tuple<string, string>>;

    get-arguments: func() -> list<string>;
  }
  interface exit {
    exit: func(status: result);
  }
  interface stdin {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{input-stream};

    get-stdin: func() -> input-stream;
  }
  interface stdout {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{output-stream};

    get-stdout: func() -> output-stream;
  }
  interface stderr {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{output-stream};

    get-stderr: func() -> output-stream;
  }
  interface terminal-input {
    resource terminal-input;
  }
  interface terminal-output {
    resource terminal-output;
  }
  interface terminal-stdin {
    use terminal-input.{terminal-input};

    get-terminal-stdin: func() -> option<terminal-input>;
  }
  interface terminal-stdout {
    use terminal-output.{terminal-output};

    get-terminal-stdout: func() -> option<terminal-output>;
  }
  interface terminal-stderr {
    use terminal-output.{terminal-output};

    get-terminal-stderr: func() -> option<terminal-output>;
  }
  interface run {
    run: func() -> result;
  }
}


package wasi:clocks@0.2.0 {
  interface monotonic-clock {
    use wasi:io/poll@0.2.0.{pollable};

    type duration = u64;

    type instant = u64;

    now: func() -> instant;

    subscribe-instant: func(when: instant) -> pollable;

    subscribe-duration: func(when: duration) -> pollable;
  }
  interface wall-clock {
    record datetime {
      seconds: u64,
      nanoseconds: u32,
    }

    now: func() -> datetime;
  }
}


package wasi:filesystem@0.2.0 {
  interface types {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{input-stream, output-stream};
    use wasi:clocks/wall-clock@0.2.0.{datetime};
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{error};

    resource descriptor {
      read-via-stream: func(offset: filesize) -> result<input-stream, error-code>;
      write-via-stream: func(offset: filesize) -> result<output-stream, error-code>;
      append-via-stream: func() -> result<output-stream, error-code>;
      advise: func(offset: filesize, length: filesize, advice: advice) -> result<_, error-code>;
      get-flags: func() -> result<descriptor-flags, error-code>;
      get-type: func() -> result<descriptor-type, error-code>;
      set-size: func(size: filesize) -> result<_, error-code>;
      read: func(length: filesize, offset: filesize) -> result<tuple<list<u8>, bool>, error-code>;
      read-directory: func() -> result<directory-entry-stream, error-code>;
      stat: func() -> result<descriptor-stat, error-code>;
      stat-at: func(path-flags: path-flags, path: string) -> result<descriptor-stat, error-code>;
      open-at: func(path-flags: path-flags, path: string, open-flags: open-flags, %flags: descriptor-flags) -> result<descriptor, error-code>;
      readlink-at: func(path: string) -> result<string, error-code>;
      unlink-file-at: func(path: string) -> result<_, error-code>;
      metadata-hash: func() -> result<metadata-hash-value, error-code>;
      metadata-hash-at: func(path-flags: path-flags, path: string) -> result<metadata-hash-value, error-code>;
    }

    type filesize = u64;

    enum error-code {
      access,
      would-block,
      already,
      bad-descriptor,
      busy,
      deadlock,
      quota,
      exist,
      file-too-large,
      illegal-byte-sequence,
      in-progress,
      interrupted,
      invalid,
      io,
      is-directory,
      loop,
      too-many-links,
      message-size,
      name-too-long,
      no-device,
      no-entry,
      no-lock,
      insufficient-memory,
      insufficient-space,
      not-directory,
      not-empty,
      not-recoverable,
      unsupported,
      no-tty,
      no-such-device,
      overflow,
      not-permitted,
      pipe,
      read-only,
      invalid-seek,
      text-file-busy,
      cross-device,
    }

    enum advice {
      normal,
      sequential,
      random,
      will-need,
      dont-need,
      no-reuse,
    }

    flags descriptor-flags {
      read,
      write,
      file-integrity-sync,
      data-integrity-sync,
      requested-write-sync,
      mutate-directory,
    }

    enum descriptor-type {
      unknown,
      block-device,
      character-device,
      directory,
      fifo,
      symbolic-link,
      regular-file,
      socket,
    }

    resource directory-entry-stream {
      read-directory-entry: func() -> result<option<directory-entry>, error-code>;
    }

    type link-count = u64;

    record descriptor-stat {
      %type: descriptor-type,
      link-count: link-count,
      size: filesize,
      data-access-timestamp: option<datetime>,
      data-modification-timestamp: option<datetime>,
      status-change-timestamp: option<datetime>,
    }

    flags path-flags {
      symlink-follow,
    }

    flags open-flags {
      create,
      directory,
      exclusive,
      truncate,
    }

    record metadata-hash-value {
      lower: u64,
      upper: u64,
    }

    record directory-entry {
      %type: descriptor-type,
      name: string,
    }

    filesystem-error-code: func(err: borrow<error>) -> option<error-code>;
  }
  interface preopens {
    use types.{descriptor};

    get-directories: func() -> list<tuple<descriptor, string>>;
  }
}


package wasi:sockets@0.2.0 {
  interface network {
    enum error-code {
      unknown,
      access-denied,
      not-supported,
      invalid-argument,
      out-of-memory,
      timeout,
      concurrency-conflict,
      not-in-progress,
      would-block,
      invalid-state,
      new-socket-limit,
      address-not-bindable,
      address-in-use,
      remote-unreachable,
      connection-refused,
      connection-reset,
      connection-aborted,
      datagram-too-large,
      name-unresolvable,
      temporary-resolver-failure,
      permanent-resolver-failure,
    }
  }
  interface udp {
    resource udp-socket;

    resource incoming-datagram-stream;

    resource outgoing-datagram-stream;
  }
  interface tcp {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{input-stream, output-stream};
    use network.{error-code};

    resource tcp-socket {
      finish-connect: func() -> result<tuple<input-stream, output-stream>, error-code>;
    }
  }
}


package wasi:random@0.2.0 {
  interface random {
    get-random-bytes: func(len: u64) -> list<u8>;
  }
}


package wasi:http@0.2.0 {
  interface types {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{input-stream, output-stream};
    use wasi:io/poll@0.2.0.{pollable};

    resource fields {
      from-list: static func(entries: list<tuple<field-key, field-value>>) -> result<fields, header-error>;
      entries: func() -> list<tuple<field-key, field-value>>;
    }

    type field-key = string;

    type field-value = list<u8>;

    variant header-error {
      invalid-syntax,
      forbidden,
      immutable,
    }

    type headers = fields;

    resource outgoing-request {
      constructor(headers: headers);
      body: func() -> result<outgoing-body>;
      set-method: func(method: method) -> result;
      set-path-with-query: func(path-with-query: option<string>) -> result;
      set-scheme: func(scheme: option<scheme>) -> result;
      set-authority: func(authority: option<string>) -> result;
    }

    resource outgoing-body {
      write: func() -> result<output-stream>;
      finish: static func(this: outgoing-body, trailers: option<trailers>) -> result<_, error-code>;
    }

    variant method {
      get,
      head,
      post,
      put,
      delete,
      connect,
      options,
      trace,
      patch,
      other(string),
    }

    variant scheme {
      HTTP,
      HTTPS,
      other(string),
    }

    resource incoming-response {
      status: func() -> status-code;
      headers: func() -> headers;
      consume: func() -> result<incoming-body>;
    }

    type status-code = u16;

    resource incoming-body {
      %stream: func() -> result<input-stream>;
      finish: static func(this: incoming-body) -> future-trailers;
    }

    resource future-trailers;

    type trailers = fields;

    record DNS-error-payload {
      rcode: option<string>,
      info-code: option<u16>,
    }

    record TLS-alert-received-payload {
      alert-id: option<u8>,
      alert-message: option<string>,
    }

    record field-size-payload {
      field-name: option<string>,
      field-size: option<u32>,
    }

    variant error-code {
      DNS-timeout,
      DNS-error(DNS-error-payload),
      destination-not-found,
      destination-unavailable,
      destination-IP-prohibited,
      destination-IP-unroutable,
      connection-refused,
      connection-terminated,
      connection-timeout,
      connection-read-timeout,
      connection-write-timeout,
      connection-limit-reached,
      TLS-protocol-error,
      TLS-certificate-error,
      TLS-alert-received(TLS-alert-received-payload),
      HTTP-request-denied,
      HTTP-request-length-required,
      HTTP-request-body-size(option<u64>),
      HTTP-request-method-invalid,
      HTTP-request-URI-invalid,
      HTTP-request-URI-too-long,
      HTTP-request-header-section-size(option<u32>),
      HTTP-request-header-size(option<field-size-payload>),
      HTTP-request-trailer-section-size(option<u32>),
      HTTP-request-trailer-size(field-size-payload),
      HTTP-response-incomplete,
      HTTP-response-header-size(field-size-payload),
      HTTP-response-body-size(option<u64>),
      HTTP-response-trailer-section-size(option<u32>),
      HTTP-response-trailer-size(field-size-payload),
      HTTP-response-transfer-coding(option<string>),
      HTTP-response-content-coding(option<string>),
      HTTP-response-timeout,
      HTTP-upgrade-failed,
      HTTP-protocol-error,
      loop-detected,
      configuration-error,
      internal-error(option<string>),
    }

    resource future-incoming-response {
      subscribe: func() -> pollable;
      get: func() -> option<result<result<incoming-response, error-code>>>;
    }

    resource request-options;
  }
  interface outgoing-handler {
    use types.{outgoing-request, request-options, future-incoming-response, error-code};

    handle: func(request: outgoing-request, options: option<request-options>) -> result<future-incoming-response, error-code>;
  }
}
```
</details>

To run, the console, you need to specify Wasmtime to use the the HTTP Interface when running the module:

```bash
wasmtime run -S http .\dist\console.wasm
```

## console-http-request-rx demo

Shows how to use Reactive Extensions for .NET to several make an HTTP requests while running in a WASI environment.

```bash
PS:> cd console-http-request-rx
PS:> dotnet build
Restore complete (0.4s)
  console succeeded (3.5s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 6.3s
```

To run, the console, you need to specify Wasmtime to use the the HTTP Interface when running the module:

```bash
wasmtime run -S http .\dist\console.wasm
```

## wasi-sockets demo

Shows how to make a HTTP request using WASI sockets module.

```bash
PS:> cd .\wasi-sockets\
PS:> dotnet build
Restore complete (0.4s)
  wasi-sockets succeeded (2.7s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 4.6s
```

To run, the console, you need to use Wasmtime's security features to enable the required network capabilities:

```bash
wasmtime -S inherit-network=y .\dist\wasi-sockets.wasm
```

## Ais.Net.Receiver.Host.Wasi demo

This demo showcases `WasiSocketNmeaStreamReader`, a WebAssembly System Interface (WASI) implementation that:

- Implements the `INmeaStreamReader` interface for AIS data processing
- Serves as a WebAssembly-compatible replacement for the standard `TcpClientNmeaStreamReader` from the [Ais.Net.Receiver](https://github.com/ais-dotnet/Ais.Net.Receiver) library
- Connects to the Norwegian Coastal Administration's TCP endpoint to receive maritime vessel tracking data
- Processes raw AIS AIVDM/AIVDO sentences (standardized maritime vessel tracking messages)

Technical Benefits:

- Allows AIS data processing in WebAssembly environments
- Demonstrates how network-dependent .NET libraries can be adapted for WASI
- Shows practical use of the WASI sockets API with real-world data sources
- The data stream covers vessel movements approximately 40-60 nautical miles from the Norwegian coastline, collected from over 50 coastal base stations.

```bash
PS:> cd .\Ais.Net.Receiver.Host.Wasi\
PS:>dotnet build
Restore complete (1.0s)
  Ais.Net.Receiver.Host.Wasi succeeded (9.2s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 16.0s
```

To run, the console, you need to use Wasmtime's security features to enable the required network capabilities:

```bash
wasmtime -S inherit-network=y .\dist\Ais.Net.Receiver.Host.Wasi.wasm
```

Commit message:

Add the NLOD license details

README.md, after:

# componentize-dotnet-demo

Exploring componentize-dotnet via various examples from [James Sturtevant](https://github.com/jsturtevant) and [Eric Gregory](https://github.com/ericgregory).

## Background Reading

- 📄 [Simplifying components for .NET/C# developers with componentize-dotnet](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/simplifying-components-for-dotnet-developers-with-componentize-dotnet)
- 📄 [Distributing WebAssembly components using OCI registries](https://opensource.microsoft.com/blog/2024/09/25/distributing-webassembly-components-using-oci-registries/)
- 🗂️ [componentize-dotnet](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/componentize-dotnet)
- 🗂️ [csharp-components-demos](https://github.com/jsturtevant/csharp-components-demos)
- 📺 [Exploring C# Wasm Components - James Sturtevant, Microsoft](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cwWb-bE3c4o)
- 📺 [Contain Yourself: Wasm and the OCI Spec - Taylor Thomas, Cosmonic & James Sturtevant, Microsoft](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y8ZDBOR_2Ms)

## Pre-requisites

- [Install .NET 9.0](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/download/dotnet/9.0)
- Wasmtime - `winget install BytecodeAlliance.Wasmtime`
- Install [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) - `winget install Rustlang.Rustup `
- Install [cargo binstall](https://github.com/cargo-bins/cargo-binstall) - `Set-ExecutionPolicy Unrestricted -Scope Process; iex (iwr "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cargo-bins/cargo-binstall/main/install-from-binstall-release.ps1").Content`
- Install [WebAssembly Compositions (WAC)](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wac) CLI - `cargo binstall wac-cli`
- Install [wasm-tools](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasm-tools) - `cargo binstall wasm-tools`

## Hello World demo

Shows how to compile a simple hello world application to WASM

```bash
PS:> cd hello-world
PS:> dotnet restore
Restore complete (29.5s)

Build succeeded in 29.6s
PS:> dotnet build
Restore complete (0.4s)
  hello succeeded (76.9s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 79.7s

PS:> wasmtime bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\native\hello.wasm
Hello, World!
```

## wasi-http-server demo

Shows how reference a WebAssembly Interface Type (WIT) artifact in an OCI registry. See `wasi-http-server.csproj` for the details.

```bash
PS:> cd wasi-http-server
PS:> dotnet build
Restore complete (0.4s)
  hello succeeded (76.9s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 79.7s

PS:> wasmtime serve -S cli  .\bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\native\wasi-http-server.wasm --addr 127.0.0.1:3000 
```

In another terminal

```bash
PS:> Invoke-RestMethod http://127.0.0.1:3000/   
Hello, World!
```

## console-http-request demo

Shows how to make an HTTP request while running in a WASI environment.

```bash
PS:> cd console-http-request
PS:> dotnet build
Restore complete (0.4s)
  console succeeded (3.5s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 6.3s
```

To see the WIT Components in the WASM file, run:

```bash
wasm-tools component wit .\dist\console.wasm

```

<details><summary><b>Show WebAssembly Interface Types (WIT) from the console WASM component.</b></summary>

```wit
package root:component;

world root {
  import wasi:cli/environment@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/exit@0.2.0;
  import wasi:io/error@0.2.0;
  import wasi:io/poll@0.2.0;
  import wasi:io/streams@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/stdin@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/stdout@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/stderr@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/terminal-input@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/terminal-output@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/terminal-stdin@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/terminal-stdout@0.2.0;
  import wasi:cli/terminal-stderr@0.2.0;
  import wasi:clocks/monotonic-clock@0.2.0;
  import wasi:clocks/wall-clock@0.2.0;
  import wasi:filesystem/types@0.2.0;
  import wasi:filesystem/preopens@0.2.0;
  import wasi:sockets/network@0.2.0;
  import wasi:sockets/udp@0.2.0;
  import wasi:sockets/tcp@0.2.0;
  import wasi:random/random@0.2.0;
  import wasi:http/types@0.2.0;
  import wasi:http/outgoing-handler@0.2.0;

  export wasi:cli/run@0.2.0;
}
package wasi:io@0.2.0 {
  interface error {
    resource error;
  }
  interface poll {
    resource pollable;

    poll: func(in: list<borrow<pollable>>) -> list<u32>;
  }
  interface streams {
    use error.{error};
    use poll.{pollable};

    resource input-stream {
      read: func(len: u64) -> result<list<u8>, stream-error>;
      blocking-read: func(len: u64) -> result<list<u8>, stream-error>;
      subscribe: func() -> pollable;
    }

    variant stream-error {
      last-operation-failed(error),
      closed,
    }

    resource output-stream {
      check-write: func() -> result<u64, stream-error>;
      write: func(contents: list<u8>) -> result<_, stream-error>;
      blocking-write-and-flush: func(contents: list<u8>) -> result<_, stream-error>;
      flush: func() -> result<_, stream-error>;
      blocking-flush: func() -> result<_, stream-error>;
      subscribe: func() -> pollable;
    }
  }
}


package wasi:cli@0.2.0 {
  interface environment {
    get-environment: func() -> list<tuple<string, string>>;

    get-arguments: func() -> list<string>;
  }
  interface exit {
    exit: func(status: result);
  }
  interface stdin {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{input-stream};

    get-stdin: func() -> input-stream;
  }
  interface stdout {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{output-stream};

    get-stdout: func() -> output-stream;
  }
  interface stderr {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{output-stream};

    get-stderr: func() -> output-stream;
  }
  interface terminal-input {
    resource terminal-input;
  }
  interface terminal-output {
    resource terminal-output;
  }
  interface terminal-stdin {
    use terminal-input.{terminal-input};

    get-terminal-stdin: func() -> option<terminal-input>;
  }
  interface terminal-stdout {
    use terminal-output.{terminal-output};

    get-terminal-stdout: func() -> option<terminal-output>;
  }
  interface terminal-stderr {
    use terminal-output.{terminal-output};

    get-terminal-stderr: func() -> option<terminal-output>;
  }
  interface run {
    run: func() -> result;
  }
}


package wasi:clocks@0.2.0 {
  interface monotonic-clock {
    use wasi:io/poll@0.2.0.{pollable};

    type duration = u64;

    type instant = u64;

    now: func() -> instant;

    subscribe-instant: func(when: instant) -> pollable;

    subscribe-duration: func(when: duration) -> pollable;
  }
  interface wall-clock {
    record datetime {
      seconds: u64,
      nanoseconds: u32,
    }

    now: func() -> datetime;
  }
}


package wasi:filesystem@0.2.0 {
  interface types {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{input-stream, output-stream};
    use wasi:clocks/wall-clock@0.2.0.{datetime};
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{error};

    resource descriptor {
      read-via-stream: func(offset: filesize) -> result<input-stream, error-code>;
      write-via-stream: func(offset: filesize) -> result<output-stream, error-code>;
      append-via-stream: func() -> result<output-stream, error-code>;
      advise: func(offset: filesize, length: filesize, advice: advice) -> result<_, error-code>;
      get-flags: func() -> result<descriptor-flags, error-code>;
      get-type: func() -> result<descriptor-type, error-code>;
      set-size: func(size: filesize) -> result<_, error-code>;
      read: func(length: filesize, offset: filesize) -> result<tuple<list<u8>, bool>, error-code>;
      read-directory: func() -> result<directory-entry-stream, error-code>;
      stat: func() -> result<descriptor-stat, error-code>;
      stat-at: func(path-flags: path-flags, path: string) -> result<descriptor-stat, error-code>;
      open-at: func(path-flags: path-flags, path: string, open-flags: open-flags, %flags: descriptor-flags) -> result<descriptor, error-code>;
      readlink-at: func(path: string) -> result<string, error-code>;
      unlink-file-at: func(path: string) -> result<_, error-code>;
      metadata-hash: func() -> result<metadata-hash-value, error-code>;
      metadata-hash-at: func(path-flags: path-flags, path: string) -> result<metadata-hash-value, error-code>;
    }

    type filesize = u64;

    enum error-code {
      access,
      would-block,
      already,
      bad-descriptor,
      busy,
      deadlock,
      quota,
      exist,
      file-too-large,
      illegal-byte-sequence,
      in-progress,
      interrupted,
      invalid,
      io,
      is-directory,
      loop,
      too-many-links,
      message-size,
      name-too-long,
      no-device,
      no-entry,
      no-lock,
      insufficient-memory,
      insufficient-space,
      not-directory,
      not-empty,
      not-recoverable,
      unsupported,
      no-tty,
      no-such-device,
      overflow,
      not-permitted,
      pipe,
      read-only,
      invalid-seek,
      text-file-busy,
      cross-device,
    }

    enum advice {
      normal,
      sequential,
      random,
      will-need,
      dont-need,
      no-reuse,
    }

    flags descriptor-flags {
      read,
      write,
      file-integrity-sync,
      data-integrity-sync,
      requested-write-sync,
      mutate-directory,
    }

    enum descriptor-type {
      unknown,
      block-device,
      character-device,
      directory,
      fifo,
      symbolic-link,
      regular-file,
      socket,
    }

    resource directory-entry-stream {
      read-directory-entry: func() -> result<option<directory-entry>, error-code>;
    }

    type link-count = u64;

    record descriptor-stat {
      %type: descriptor-type,
      link-count: link-count,
      size: filesize,
      data-access-timestamp: option<datetime>,
      data-modification-timestamp: option<datetime>,
      status-change-timestamp: option<datetime>,
    }

    flags path-flags {
      symlink-follow,
    }

    flags open-flags {
      create,
      directory,
      exclusive,
      truncate,
    }

    record metadata-hash-value {
      lower: u64,
      upper: u64,
    }

    record directory-entry {
      %type: descriptor-type,
      name: string,
    }

    filesystem-error-code: func(err: borrow<error>) -> option<error-code>;
  }
  interface preopens {
    use types.{descriptor};

    get-directories: func() -> list<tuple<descriptor, string>>;
  }
}


package wasi:sockets@0.2.0 {
  interface network {
    enum error-code {
      unknown,
      access-denied,
      not-supported,
      invalid-argument,
      out-of-memory,
      timeout,
      concurrency-conflict,
      not-in-progress,
      would-block,
      invalid-state,
      new-socket-limit,
      address-not-bindable,
      address-in-use,
      remote-unreachable,
      connection-refused,
      connection-reset,
      connection-aborted,
      datagram-too-large,
      name-unresolvable,
      temporary-resolver-failure,
      permanent-resolver-failure,
    }
  }
  interface udp {
    resource udp-socket;

    resource incoming-datagram-stream;

    resource outgoing-datagram-stream;
  }
  interface tcp {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{input-stream, output-stream};
    use network.{error-code};

    resource tcp-socket {
      finish-connect: func() -> result<tuple<input-stream, output-stream>, error-code>;
    }
  }
}


package wasi:random@0.2.0 {
  interface random {
    get-random-bytes: func(len: u64) -> list<u8>;
  }
}


package wasi:http@0.2.0 {
  interface types {
    use wasi:io/streams@0.2.0.{input-stream, output-stream};
    use wasi:io/poll@0.2.0.{pollable};

    resource fields {
      from-list: static func(entries: list<tuple<field-key, field-value>>) -> result<fields, header-error>;
      entries: func() -> list<tuple<field-key, field-value>>;
    }

    type field-key = string;

    type field-value = list<u8>;

    variant header-error {
      invalid-syntax,
      forbidden,
      immutable,
    }

    type headers = fields;

    resource outgoing-request {
      constructor(headers: headers);
      body: func() -> result<outgoing-body>;
      set-method: func(method: method) -> result;
      set-path-with-query: func(path-with-query: option<string>) -> result;
      set-scheme: func(scheme: option<scheme>) -> result;
      set-authority: func(authority: option<string>) -> result;
    }

    resource outgoing-body {
      write: func() -> result<output-stream>;
      finish: static func(this: outgoing-body, trailers: option<trailers>) -> result<_, error-code>;
    }

    variant method {
      get,
      head,
      post,
      put,
      delete,
      connect,
      options,
      trace,
      patch,
      other(string),
    }

    variant scheme {
      HTTP,
      HTTPS,
      other(string),
    }

    resource incoming-response {
      status: func() -> status-code;
      headers: func() -> headers;
      consume: func() -> result<incoming-body>;
    }

    type status-code = u16;

    resource incoming-body {
      %stream: func() -> result<input-stream>;
      finish: static func(this: incoming-body) -> future-trailers;
    }

    resource future-trailers;

    type trailers = fields;

    record DNS-error-payload {
      rcode: option<string>,
      info-code: option<u16>,
    }

    record TLS-alert-received-payload {
      alert-id: option<u8>,
      alert-message: option<string>,
    }

    record field-size-payload {
      field-name: option<string>,
      field-size: option<u32>,
    }

    variant error-code {
      DNS-timeout,
      DNS-error(DNS-error-payload),
      destination-not-found,
      destination-unavailable,
      destination-IP-prohibited,
      destination-IP-unroutable,
      connection-refused,
      connection-terminated,
      connection-timeout,
      connection-read-timeout,
      connection-write-timeout,
      connection-limit-reached,
      TLS-protocol-error,
      TLS-certificate-error,
      TLS-alert-received(TLS-alert-received-payload),
      HTTP-request-denied,
      HTTP-request-length-required,
      HTTP-request-body-size(option<u64>),
      HTTP-request-method-invalid,
      HTTP-request-URI-invalid,
      HTTP-request-URI-too-long,
      HTTP-request-header-section-size(option<u32>),
      HTTP-request-header-size(option<field-size-payload>),
      HTTP-request-trailer-section-size(option<u32>),
      HTTP-request-trailer-size(field-size-payload),
      HTTP-response-incomplete,
      HTTP-response-header-size(field-size-payload),
      HTTP-response-body-size(option<u64>),
      HTTP-response-trailer-section-size(option<u32>),
      HTTP-response-trailer-size(field-size-payload),
      HTTP-response-transfer-coding(option<string>),
      HTTP-response-content-coding(option<string>),
      HTTP-response-timeout,
      HTTP-upgrade-failed,
      HTTP-protocol-error,
      loop-detected,
      configuration-error,
      internal-error(option<string>),
    }

    resource future-incoming-response {
      subscribe: func() -> pollable;
      get: func() -> option<result<result<incoming-response, error-code>>>;
    }

    resource request-options;
  }
  interface outgoing-handler {
    use types.{outgoing-request, request-options, future-incoming-response, error-code};

    handle: func(request: outgoing-request, options: option<request-options>) -> result<future-incoming-response, error-code>;
  }
}
```
</details>

To run, the console, you need to specify Wasmtime to use the the HTTP Interface when running the module:

```bash
wasmtime run -S http .\dist\console.wasm
```

## console-http-request-rx demo

Shows how to use Reactive Extensions for .NET to several make an HTTP requests while running in a WASI environment.

```bash
PS:> cd console-http-request-rx
PS:> dotnet build
Restore complete (0.4s)
  console succeeded (3.5s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 6.3s
```

To run, the console, you need to specify Wasmtime to use the the HTTP Interface when running the module:

```bash
wasmtime run -S http .\dist\console.wasm
```

## wasi-sockets demo

Shows how to make a HTTP request using WASI sockets module.

```bash
PS:> cd .\wasi-sockets\
PS:> dotnet build
Restore complete (0.4s)
  wasi-sockets succeeded (2.7s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 4.6s
```

To run, the console, you need to use Wasmtime's security features to enable the required network capabilities:

```bash
wasmtime -S inherit-network=y .\dist\wasi-sockets.wasm
```

## Ais.Net.Receiver.Host.Wasi demo

This demo showcases `WasiSocketNmeaStreamReader`, a WebAssembly System Interface (WASI) implementation that:

- Implements the `INmeaStreamReader` interface for AIS data processing
- Serves as a WebAssembly-compatible replacement for the standard `TcpClientNmeaStreamReader` from the [Ais.Net.Receiver](https://github.com/ais-dotnet/Ais.Net.Receiver) library
- Connects to the Norwegian Coastal Administration's TCP endpoint to receive maritime vessel tracking data
- Processes raw AIS AIVDM/AIVDO sentences (standardized maritime vessel tracking messages)

Technical Benefits:

- Allows AIS data processing in WebAssembly environments
- Demonstrates how network-dependent .NET libraries can be adapted for WASI
- Shows practical use of the WASI sockets API with real-world data sources
- The data stream covers vessel movements approximately 40-60 nautical miles from the Norwegian coastline, collected from over 50 coastal base stations.

The Data ingested by the AIS.Net.Receiver is licensed under the [Norwegian license for public data (NLOD)](https://data.norge.no/nlod/en/2.0)

```bash
PS:> cd .\Ais.Net.Receiver.Host.Wasi\
PS:>dotnet build
Restore complete (1.0s)
  Ais.Net.Receiver.Host.Wasi succeeded (9.2s) → bin\Debug\net9.0\wasi-wasm\publish\

Build succeeded in 16.0s
```

To run, the console, you need to use Wasmtime's security features to enable the required network capabilities:

```bash
wasmtime -S inherit-network=y .\dist\Ais.Net.Receiver.Host.Wasi.wasm
```
